---
layout: post
category: thoughts
title: Torches of Freedom
---


If you had the misfortune of watching Ridley Scott’s ‘Napoleon’, you might recall the last scene of the movie, a black screen with white letters showing the number of deaths of French troops in each of the battles Napoleon led. What was the need of this particular scene? Other than the conspicuous infantilisation of the audience with this ‘Napoleon bad’ oversimplification, this is extremely symptomatic of the sensationalisation or americanisation of media, and you see this now pretty much everywhere. [Take a look at the coverage of the ‘war’ in Palestine, how many times did you truly come across a well-meaning discussion on the realistic future of possibilities in Gaza] We have long moved from media that makes us think to media that makes us feel, which can be owed both to our growing isolation and the expansion of corporate feudalism to the most vulnerable part of our brain, and the two are not isolated. I quote this incredibly relevant passage from the Adam Curtis interview for Register.com, 

\
\
<b><i>“TV now tells you what to feel.
It doesn't tell you what to think anymore. From EastEnders to reality format shows, you're on the emotional journey of people - and through the editing, it gently suggests to you what is the agreed form of feeling. "Hugs and Kisses", I call it.</i></b>

\
\
<b><i>…It really is a system not of moral guidance, but of emotional guidance.
Morality has been replaced by feeling.”</i></b>

\
\
Curtis further argues that because of this, despite living in an age of rampant individualism, we are paradoxically also in a period of intense conformity. Journalists and broadcasters are no longer incentivised to cultivate new lines of thought among their audience, and often resolve to oversimplification, against the very notion of what journalism stands for. Despite wide criticism of social media as a source of ‘repetitive’, ‘conformist’, and ‘parasitic’ content and the very cause of the death of old media, I’d still argue this need not be the case everywhere. At least old social media, in some spaces, have served as a source of new discourse, the only proof being its early, forced demise. What was one of the greatest inventions of the 20th century, is now on rent from the likes of Mark Zuckerberg and Elon Musk, private companies have performed the abrupt feudal takeover of our social places and minds, without any public input. Counterintuitively, this privatisation would be considered democratic in a liberal sense, since like the voters in a democracy, the customer is always right in the free market.

\
\
Facebook I’d argue was truly one of the last standings of whatever remained of the ‘public space’, with Facebook groups and similar features for personalised gatherings and opportunities for mobilisation, allowing for some sort of a simulation of the public square. Unlike Twitter where you shout your thoughts into the deep dark void of the ‘algorithm’, Facebook groups cultivated discussions within groups sharing a common interest and often within subcultures. Instagram and TikTok took the formula of the dopamine slot machine, and implemented something completely devoid of community and interaction, evident in its intentionally unintuitive design for a comment section- the machine thrives on you interacting, without really interacting. The posts there are also in a very limited spectrum, 30-second videos of emotionally loaded ‘content’. Therefore with the fall of Facebook among the youth in most developed countries, there was a rise in a plethora of these dopamine machine ‘social’ medias, that prays on our physiological vulnerability guised under activism. One can argue, [like Žižek does in the context of green capitalism], that sharing emotionally obscene posts on social media in the name of activism, is nothing but frantic and obsessive,

\
\
<b><i>‘like a soccer or baseball fan who supports his team in front of a TV screen at home, shouting and jumping up from his seat, in the superstitious belief that this will somehow influence the outcome.’</i></b>

\
\
The constant provocation to the unguarded emotional part of our brain through these media, be it propaganda or curated lifestyle envy, produces a fatigue of emotions and impairs our ability to venture into cinemas, and books, that need our focussed attention, that demand us to think critically and develop those thoughts. 

\
\
This is also something that we see around feminism, or women’s rights movements in general, but the traps here are different. One is the very obvious one - the open takeover of capital, and the reduction of womanhood under the broader umbrella of consumerism. Not a lot of us are unaware of these uncharitable intentions under the guise of progressiveness but one cannot attempt to capture the extent or cunning of it without mentioning Edward Bernays and his exploits [as shown wonderfully in the Adam Curtis documentary]. Bernays, the nephew of Sigmund Freud, one of the founders of the field of public relations in the U.S., once said,

\
\
<b><i>“If you could use propaganda for war, you can certainly use it for peace”.</i></b>

\
\
And he did quite exactly that. Bernays was instrumental in the production of a new kind of customer in the 1930s America, one motivated not by necessity, but by desire. The need for durable and functional products was replaced by a desire to buy things to ‘express oneself’, and the transformation of the American citizen to the perfect consumer began.

\
\
One of his early works in the 1920s came after a meeting with George Washington Hill, the president of the American Tobacco Co., and together they planned to expand the consumer base of tobacco to include women. Bernays, along with another psychoanalyst Abraham Brill, came to the conclusion that the repulsion of cigarettes for women came from its phallic shape, a show of masculinity, and it can only be made enticing as a symbol of overcoming masculinity, and not accepting it. Bernays set his plans in motion, hired women to smoke during an Easter Sunday Parade in 1929, and alerted the media, who of course jumped at the opportunity of publicizing this scandal in the context of the ongoing suffrage movement. Bernays called these cigarettes “torches of freedom”, and he planted the age-old trap for the progressives; they were left with no option but to take their side. This was a direct acquisition of the first-wave feminist movement, but you see this playing out all across the globe, in how capitalism successfully subsumes every liberation movement that raises its head; you can support every cause, be it the trans-liberation movement or starving children in Guatemala, just by buying the right products. The fantasy here is, as Fisher points out, 

\
\
<b><i>‘…western consumerism, far from being intrinsically implicated in systemic global inequalities, could itself solve them.’</b></i>

\
\
The fallacy here again lies in the appeal to our unguarded emotions, who would in their ‘right mind’ disagree with supporting a cause if it only meant buying a different brand of coffee? 
The physiological vulnerability is again exploited by all ends of the political spectrum, albeit to different ends. The populist right media provokes our irrationality to target its reaction to the racial and gender minorities and says look, here is a grotesque solution, we don’t like it, but it must be done to protect you. You can see it clearly in this statement by Sam Harris in 2014 on Israel-Palestine,

\
\
<i><b>“..needless to say, in defending its territory as a Jewish state, the Israeli government and the Israelis themselves have had to do terrible things…”</b></i>

\
\
As Michael Brooks points out here, like most right-wingers Sam Harris "does not pose a moral question”, instead he answers it. He carefully uses the word ‘defending’ in both the context of the actions of Israel and by extension the United States, but then follows it with ‘had to’, a justification that apparently can never be applied to any defensive action from any of the Islamic countries. Their playbook is very clear, appeal to the protective nature of our identities and our irrational fear of endangerment, and then use that to sweep under the rug mindless atrocities against minorities, with a short footnote of “we don’t like it either”. 

\
\
The right is easier to analyse and critique because of its consistent subservience to historical inaccuracies and hypocritical arguments, but what needs more attention is its ever-growing roots within younger generations, in the absence of a public space of ideas. The left, on the other hand, takes a page from this playbook, and tries to capitalise on our depleting, numbing empathy towards the oppressed, without making the effort to contextualise it in critical thinking- which is why there is a noticeable change in leftist ‘leafletting’, what was before calls to think and discuss, have been reduced to writings often indistinguishable from fundraisers by charity organisations. Academic spheres of difficult discussions around complex topics are now nauseating defeatist monologues on self-pity, a desperate cry to the irrational part of our brain, not to think rationally, but to feel sorry. This is evident in some new-generation liberals in India, who often dream of an Islamic country, or at least write uncritical apologia of Islamic violence, because their empathy repeatedly provoked without the call to develop their thoughts has confused the oppressed with the infallible. 

\
\
The difference between the populist right and left is in the position where the right claims to provide this solution in terms of one-sided and preemptive violence we ‘have to’ do, whether the left humbly makes no such promises. Cynicism and fear, the two dominant emotions in our public discourse, therefore tend to push the untrained [to critically think] masses towards the right wing populists who provide a ready answer, however deprived it might be. But the war over this [as Freud describes] ‘animalistic’ part of our brain, is surely not one the left can win, without first addressing the unfairness of the premise. What is left to do is to abandon the banal anecdotal narratives of encounters with the abstract super state of the oppressor often placed without the context of critical thinking, and steer towards the cultivation of uncomfortable ideas. Maybe it is time to abandon the fatigued dream of the welfare state, and practically demand first the restoration of traditional capitalism [I mention here Beijing, China, where a recent stock exchange was opened to promote small businesses, the irony of the situation, as Žižek points out, is “a Communist regime is needed to keep capitalism alive” in the advent of neo-feudal corporatism]. Or maybe we should return rightfully to Lenin’s “On Ascending a High Mountain” written after the Bolshevik retreat into the NEP (New Economic Policy),

\
\
<i><b>“Communists who have no illusions, who do not give way to despondency, and who preserve their strength and flexibility “to begin from the beginning “ over and over again in approaching an extremely difficult task, are not doomed (and in all probability will not perish).”</b></i>

\
\
The message here is that movement, any movement, by characteristic is repetitive and often it is required to “begin from the beginning”, without expecting to find success in the direction of a previous failed effort. Maybe, in the face of life-threatening climate crises, it's imperative we rethink, move outside the failed ‘discourse’ of manipulation of feelings, and reevaluate what is to be done. 





